# 7.9 World Energy Use

# LEARNING OBJECTIVES

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

• Describe the distinction between renewable and nonrenewable energy sources. • Explain why the inevitable conversion of energy to less useful forms makes it necessary to conserve energy resources.

Energy is an important ingredient in all phases of society. We live in a very interdependent world, and access to adequate and reliable energy resources is crucial for economic growth and for maintaining the quality of our lives. But current levels of energy consumption and production are not sustainable. Depending on the data source, estimates indicate that about $31 \text{‰}$ of the world’s energy comes from oil, and much of that goes to transportation uses. This is a reduction by a few percentage points from ten years ago. Oil prices are dependent as much upon new (or foreseen) discoveries as they are upon political events and situations around the world. The U.S., with $4 . 2 5 \%$ of the world’s population, consumes $2 1 \%$ of the world’s oil production per year.

# Renewable and Nonrenewable Energy Sources

The principal energy resources used in the world are shown in Figure 7.26. The fuel mix has changed over the years but now is dominated by oil, although natural gas and solar contributions are increasing. Renewable forms of energy are those sources that cannot be used up, such as water, wind, solar, and biomass. About $8 5 \%$ of our energy comes from nonrenewable fossil fuels—oil, natural gas, coal. The likelihood of a link between global warming and fossil fuel use, with its production of carbon dioxide through combustion, has made, in the eyes of many scientists, a shift to non-fossil fuels of utmost importance—but it will not be easy.

# The World’s Growing Energy Needs

World energy consumption continues to rise, especially in the developing countries. (See Figure 7.27.) Global demand for energy has tripled in the past 50 years and might triple again in the next 30 years. While much of this growth will come from the rapidly booming economies of China and India, many of the developed countries, especially those in Europe, are hoping to meet their energy needs by expanding the use of renewable sources. Although presently only a small percentage, renewable energy is growing very fast, especially wind energy. For example, Germany plans to meet $6 5 \%$ of its power and $30 \%$ of its overall energy needs with renewable resources by the year 2030. (See Figure 7.28.) Energy is a key constraint in the rapid economic growth of China and India. In 2003, China surpassed Japan as the world’s second largest consumer of oil. However, over $_ { 1 / 3 }$ of this is imported. Unlike most Western countries, coal dominates the commercial energy resources of China, accounting for $2 / 3$ of its energy consumption. In 2009 China surpassed the United States as the largest generator of $\mathrm { C O } _ { 2 }$ . In India, the main energy resources are biomass (wood and dung) and coal. Half of India’s oil is imported. About $7 0 \%$ of India’s

electricity is generated by highly polluting coal. Yet there are sizeable strides being made in renewable energy. India has a rapidly growing wind energy base, and it has the largest solar cooking program in the world. China has invested substantially in building solar collection farms as well as hydroelectric plants.

Table 7.6 displays the 2020 commercial energy mix by country for some of the prime energy users in the world. While non-renewable sources dominate, some countries get a sizeable percentage of their electricity from renewable resources. For example, about two-thirds of New Zealand’s electricity demand is met by hydroelectric. Only $1 0 \%$ of the U.S. electricity is generated by renewable resources, primarily hydroelectric. It is difficult to determine total sources and consumers of energy in many countries, and estimates vary somewhat by data source and type of measurement.

# Energy and Economic Well-being

Economic well-being is dependent upon energy use, and in most countries higher standards of living, as measured by GDP (gross domestic product) per capita, are matched by higher levels of energy consumption per capita. This is borne out in Figure 7.29. Increased efficiency of energy use will change this dependency. A global problem is balancing energy resource development against the harmful effects upon the environment in its extraction and use.

New and diversified energy sources do, however, greatly increase economic opportunity and stability. First, the extensive employment opportunities in renewable energy make it one of the most sustainable and secure fields to enter. Second, renewable energy provides countries and localities with increased levels of resiliency in the face of natural disasters, conflict, or other disruptions. The 21st century has already seen major economic impacts from energy disruptions: Hurricane Katrina, Superstorm Sandy, various wildfires, Hurricane Maria, and the 2021 Texas Winter Storm demonstrate the vulnerability of United States power systems. Diversifying energy sources through renewables and other fossil-fuel alternatives brings power grids and transportation systems back online much more quickly, saving lives and enabling a more swift return to economic operations. And as critical emerging information infrastructure, such as data centers, requires more of the world's energy, supplying those growing systems during normal operations and crises will be increasingly important.

# Conserving Energy

As we finish this chapter on energy and work, it is relevant to draw some distinctions between two sometimes misunderstood terms in the area of energy use. As has been mentioned elsewhere, the “law of the conservation of energy” is a very useful principle in analyzing physical processes. It is a statement that cannot be proven from basic principles, but is a very good bookkeeping device, and no exceptions have ever been found. It states that the total amount of energy in an isolated system will always remain constant. Related to this principle, but remarkably different from it, is the important philosophy of energy conservation. This concept has to do with seeking to decrease the amount of energy used by an individual or group through (1) reduced activities (e.g., turning down thermostats, driving fewer kilometers) and/or (2) increasing conversion efficiencies in the performance of a particular task—such as developing and using more efficient room heaters, cars that have greater miles-per-gallon ratings, energy-efficient compact fluorescent lights, etc.

Since energy in an isolated system is not destroyed or created or generated, one might wonder why we need to be concerned about our energy resources, since energy is a conserved quantity. The problem is that the final result of most energy transformations is waste heat transfer to the environment and conversion to energy forms no longer useful for doing work. To state it in another way, the potential for energy to produce useful work has been “degraded” in the energy transformation. (This will be discussed in more detail in Thermodynamics.)

# Glossary

basal metabolic rate the total energy conversion rate of a person at rest   
chemical energy the energy in a substance stored in the bonds between atoms and molecules that can be released in a chemical reaction   
conservation of mechanical energy the rule that the sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies remains constant if only conservative forces act on and within a system   
conservative force a force that does the same work for any given initial and final configuration, regardless of the path followed   
efficiency a measure of the effectiveness of the input of energy to do work; useful energy or work divided by the total input of energy   
electrical energy the energy carried by a flow of charge   
energy the ability to do work   
fossil fuels oil, natural gas, and coal   
friction the force between surfaces that opposes one sliding on the other; friction changes mechanical energy into thermal energy   
gravitational potential energy the energy an object has due to its position in a gravitational field   
horsepower an older non-SI unit of power, with $1 \mathrm { h p } = 7 4 6 \mathrm { W }$   
joule SI unit of work and energy, equal to one newton-meter   
kilowatt-hour $( \mathrm { k W \cdot h } )$ unit used primarily for electrical energy provided by electric utility companies   
kinetic energy the energy an object has by reason of its motion, equal to $\scriptstyle { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } m v ^ { 2 }$ for the translational (i.e., non-rotational) motion of an object of mass $m$ moving at speed $v$   
law of conservation of energy the general law that total energy is constant in any process; energy may change in form or be transferred from one system to another, but the total remains the same   
mechanical energy the sum of kinetic energy and potential energy   
metabolic rate the rate at which the body uses food energy to sustain life and to do different activities   
net work work done by the net force, or vector sum of all the forces, acting on an object   
nonconservative force a force whose work depends on the path followed between the given initial and final configurations   
nuclear energy energy released by changes within atomic nuclei, such as the fusion of two light nuclei or the fission of a heavy nucleus   
potential energy energy due to position, shape, or configuration   
potential energy of a spring the stored energy of a spring as a function of its displacement; when Hooke’s law applies, it is given by the expression ${ \scriptstyle { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } } k x ^ { 2 }$ where $x$ is the distance the spring is compressed or extended and $k$ is the spring constant   
power the rate at which work is done   
radiant energy the energy carried by electromagnetic waves   
renewable forms of energy those sources that cannot be used up, such as water, wind, solar, and biomass   
thermal energy the energy within an object due to the random motion of its atoms and molecules that accounts for the object's temperature   
useful work work done on an external system   
watt (W) SI unit of power, with $1 \mathrm { W } = 1$ J/s   
work the transfer of energy by a force that causes an object to be displaced; the product of the component of the force in the direction of the displacement and the magnitude of the displacement   
work-energy theorem the result, based on Newton’s laws, that the net work done on an object is equal to its change in kinetic energy



# Section Summary

# 7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition

• Work is the transfer of energy by a force acting on an object as it is displaced.   
• The work $W$ that a force $\mathbf { F }$ does on an object is the product of the magnitude $F$ of the force, times the magnitude $d$ of the displacement, times the cosine of the angle $\theta$ between them. In symbols, $W = F d \cos \theta$   
The SI unit for work and energy is the joule (J), where $1 \ \mathrm { J } = 1 \ \mathrm { N } \cdot \mathrm { m } = 1 \ \mathrm { k g } \cdot \mathrm { m } ^ { 2 } / \mathrm { s } ^ { 2 }$ .   
• The work done by a force is zero if the displacement is either zero or perpendicular to the force.   
• The work done is positive if the force and displacement have the same direction, and negative if they have opposite direction.



# 7.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem

• The net work $W _ { \mathrm { n e t } }$ is the work done by the net

force acting on an object.   
• Work done on an object transfers energy to the object.   
The translational kinetic energy of an object of mass moving at speed $v$ is $\begin{array} { r } { \mathrm { K E } = { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } m v ^ { 2 } } \end{array}$ .   
The work-energy theorem states that the net work $W _ { \mathrm { n e t } }$ on a system changes its kinetic energy, $\begin{array} { r } { W _ { \mathrm { n e t } } = \frac { 1 } { 2 } m v ^ { 2 } - \frac { 1 } { 2 } m v _ { 0 } ^ { 2 } } \end{array}$ .

# 7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy

• Work done against gravity in lifting an object becomes potential energy of the object-Earth system.   
• The change in gravitational potential energy, $\Delta \mathrm { P E _ { g } }$ , is $\Delta \mathrm { P E _ { g } } = m g h$ , with $h$ being the increase in height and the acceleration due to gravity.   
The gravitational potential energy of an object near Earth’s surface is due to its position in the massEarth system. Only differences in gravitational potential energy, $\Delta \mathrm { P E _ { g } }$ , have physical significance.   
• As an object descends without friction, its gravitational potential energy changes into kinetic energy corresponding to increasing speed, so that △KE=-△PEg.

# 7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential Energy

• A conservative force is one for which work depends only on the starting and ending points of a motion, not on the path taken.   
• We can define potential energy for any conservative force, just as we defined $\mathrm { P E _ { g } }$ for the gravitational force.   
• The potential energy of a spring is $\begin{array} { r } { \mathrm { P E } _ { \mathrm { s } } = \frac { 1 } { 2 } k x ^ { 2 } } \end{array}$ , where $k$ is the spring’s force constant and $x$ is the displacement from its undeformed position.   
• Mechanical energy is defined to be $\mathrm { K E + P E }$ for a conservative force.   
• When only conservative forces act on and within a system, the total mechanical energy is constant. In equation form,   
• Friction is an example of a nonconservative force that changes mechanical energy into thermal energy.   
• Work $W _ { \mathrm { n c } }$ done by a nonconservative force changes the mechanical energy of a system. In equation form, $W _ { \mathrm { n c } } = \Delta \mathrm { K E } + \Delta \mathrm { P E }$ or, equivalently, $\mathrm { K E _ { i } } + \mathrm { P E _ { i } } + W _ { \mathrm { n c } } = \mathrm { K E _ { f } } + \mathrm { P E _ { f } }$ .   
• When both conservative and nonconservative forces act, energy conservation can be applied and used to calculate motion in terms of the known potential energies of the conservative forces and the work done by nonconservative forces, instead of finding the net work from the net force, or having to directly apply Newton’s laws.



# 7.6 Conservation of Energy

• The law of conservation of energy states that the total energy is constant in any process. Energy may change in form or be transferred from one system to another, but the total remains the same.   
• When all forms of energy are considered, conservation of energy is written in equation form as $\mathrm { K E _ { i } } + \mathrm { P E _ { i } } + W _ { \mathrm { n c } } + \mathrm { O E _ { i } } = \mathrm { K E _ { f } } + \mathrm { P E _ { f } } + \mathrm { O E _ { f } }$ , where is all other forms of energy besides mechanical energy.   
• Commonly encountered forms of energy include electric energy, chemical energy, radiant energy, nuclear energy, and thermal energy. Energy is often utilized to do work, but it is not possible to convert all the energy of a system to work.   
• The efficiency $E f f$ of a machine or human is defined to be $E f f = { \frac { W _ { \mathrm { o u t } } } { E _ { \mathrm { i n } } } }$ , where is useful work output and $E _ { \mathrm { i n } }$ is the energy consumed.

# 7.7 Power

• Power is the rate at which work is done, or in equation form, for the average power $P$ for work $W$ done over a time , $P = W / t$ .   
• The SI unit for power is the watt $( \mathsf { W } )$ , where $1 \mathrm { W } = 1 \mathrm { J / s }$ .   
• The power of many devices such as electric motors is also often expressed in horsepower (hp), where $1 \mathrm { h p } = 7 4 6 \mathrm { W }$ .

or $\left. \begin{array} { r l } & { \mathrm { K E + P E = c o n s t a n t } } \\ & { } \\ & { \mathrm { K E _ { i } + P E _ { i } = K E _ { f } + P E _ { f } } } \end{array} \right\}$ (conservative forces only) where i and f denote initial and final values. This is known as the conservation of mechanical energy.

# 7.5 Nonconservative Forces

• A nonconservative force is one for which work depends on the path.

# 7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans

• The human body converts energy stored in food into work, thermal energy, and/or chemical energy that is stored in fatty tissue.   
• The rateat which the body uses food energy to sustain life and to do different activities is called the metabolic rate, and the corresponding rate

when at rest is called the basal metabolic rate (BMR) The energy included in the basal metabolic rate is divided among various systems in the body, with the largest fraction going to the liver and spleen, and the brain coming next. • About $7 5 \%$ of food calories are used to sustain basic body functions included in the basal metabolic rate. The energy consumption of people during various activities can be determined by measuring their oxygen use, because the digestive process is basically one of oxidizing food.

# 7.9 World Energy Use

• The relative use of different fuels to provide energy has changed over the years, but fuel use is currently dominated by oil, although natural gas

and solar contributions are increasing.

• Although non-renewable sources dominate, some countries meet a sizeable percentage of their electricity needs from renewable resources.   
• The United States obtains only about $1 0 \%$ of its energy from renewable sources, mostly hydroelectric power. Economic well-being is dependent upon energy use, and in most countries higher standards of living, as measured by GDP (Gross Domestic Product) per capita, are matched by higher levels of energy consumption per capita.   
• Even though, in accordance with the law of conservation of energy, energy can never be created or destroyed, energy that can be used to do work is always partly converted to less useful forms, such as waste heat to the environment, in all of our uses of energy for practical purposes.

# Conceptual Questions

# 7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition

1. Give an example of something we think of as work in everyday circumstances that is not work in the scientific sense. Is energy transferred or changed in form in your example? If so, explain how this is accomplished without doing work.   
2. Give an example of a situation in which there is a force and a displacement, but the force does no work. Explain why it does no work.   
3. Describe a situation in which a force is exerted for a long time but does no work. Explain.

# 7.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem

4. The person in Figure 7.30 does work on the lawn mower. Under what conditions would the mower gain energy? Under what conditions would it lose energy?

5. Work done on a system puts energy into it. Work done by a system removes energy from it. Give an example for each statement.

6. When solving for speed in Example 7.4, we kept only the positive root. Why?

# 7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy

7. In Example 7.7, we calculated the final speed of a roller coaster that descended $2 0 ~ \mathsf { m }$ in height and had an initial speed of $5 \mathrm { m / s }$ downhill. Suppose the roller coaster had had an initial speed of $5 \mathrm { m / s }$ uphil instead, and it coasted uphill, stopped, and then rolled back down to a final point $2 0 ~ \mathsf { m }$ below the start. We would find in that case that its final speed is the same as its initial speed. Explain in terms of conservation of energy.   
8. Does the work you do on a book when you lift it onto a shelf depend on the path taken? On the time taken? On the height of the shelf? On the mass of the book?

# 7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential Energy

9. What is a conservative force?

10. The force exerted by a diving board is conservative, provided the internal friction is negligible. Assuming friction is negligible, describe changes in the potential energy of a diving board as a swimmer dives from it, starting just before the swimmer steps on the board until just after his feet leave it.   
11. Define mechanical energy. What is the relationship of mechanical energy to nonconservative forces? What happens to mechanical energy if only conservative forces act?

12. What is the relationship of potential energy to conservative force?

# 7.6 Conservation of Energy

13. Consider the following scenario. A car for which friction is notnegligible accelerates from rest down a hill, running out of gasoline after a short distance. The driver lets the car coast farther down the hill, then up and over a small crest. He then coasts down that hill into a gas station, where he brakes to a stop and fills the tank with gasoline. Identify the forms of energy the car has, and how they are changed and transferred in this series of events. (See Figure 7.31.)

14. Describe the energy transfers and transformations for a javelin, starting from the point at which an athlete picks up the javelin and ending when the javelin is stuck into the ground after being thrown.   
15. Do devices with efficiencies of less than one violate the law of conservation of energy? Explain.   
16. List four different forms or types of energy. Give one example of a conversion from each of these forms to another form.   
17. List the energy conversions that occur when riding a bicycle.

# 7.7 Power

18. Most electrical appliances are rated in watts. Does this rating depend on how long the appliance is on? (When off, it is a zero-watt device.) Explain in terms of the definition of power.   
19. Explain, in terms of the definition of power, why energy consumption is sometimes listed in kilowatt-hours rather than joules. What is the relationship between these two energy units?   
20. A spark of static electricity, such as that you might receive from a doorknob on a cold dry day, may carry a few hundred watts of power. Explain why you are not injured by such a spark.

# 7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans

21. Explain why it is easier to climb a mountain on a zigzag path rather than one straight up the side. Is your increase in gravitational potential energy the same in both cases? Is your energy consumption the same in both?   
22. Do you do work on the outside world when you rub your hands together to warm them? What is the efficiency of this activity?   
23. Shivering is an involuntary response to lowered body temperature. What is the efficiency of the body when shivering, and is this a desirable value?   
24. Discuss the relative impact of dieting and exercise, noting that most athletic activities consume food energy at a rate of 400 to 500 W, while a single cup of yogurt can contain ${ } ^ { 1 3 6 0 \mathsf { k } \mathsf { J } }$ $( 3 2 5 \mathsf { k c a l } )$ .

# 7.9 World Energy Use

25. What is the difference between energy conservation and the law of conservation of energy? Give some examples of each.   
26. If the efficiency of a coal-fired electrical generating plant is $3 5 \%$ , then what do we mean when we say that energy is a conserved quantity?

# Problems & Exercises

# 7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition

1. How much work does a supermarket checkout attendant do on a can of soup he pushes $0 . 6 0 0 \mathrm { ~ m ~ }$ horizontally with a force of 5.00 N? Express your answer in joules and kilocalories.   
2. A $7 5 . 0 \substack { - \mathrm { k g } }$ person climbs stairs, gaining 2.50 meters in height. Find the work done to accomplish this task. (Neglect friction in your calculations.)

3. (a) Calculate the work done on a $\mathtt { 1 5 0 0 - k g }$ elevator car by its cable to lift it $4 0 . 0 \mathsf { m }$ at constant speed, assuming friction averages $\textstyle 1 0 0 { \mathsf { N } } .$ . (b) What is the work done on the elevator car by the gravitational force in this process? (c) What is the total work done on the elevator car?

4. Suppose a car travels $1 0 8 { \mathsf { k m } }$ at a speed of $3 0 . 0 \mathrm { m } /$ s, and uses 2.0 gal of gasoline. Only $30 \%$ of the gasoline goes into useful work by the force that keeps the car moving at constant speed despite friction. (See Table 7.1 for the energy content of gasoline.) (a) What is the magnitude of the force exerted to keep the car moving at constant speed? (b) If the required force is directly proportional to speed, how many gallons will be used to drive 108 km at a speed of $2 8 . 0 \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s } ?$   
5. Calculate the work done by an $8 5 . 0 \substack { - \mathrm { k g } }$ man who pushes a crate $4 . 0 0 \mathrm { m }$ up along a ramp that makes an angle of $2 0 . 0 ^ { \circ }$ with the horizontal. (See Figure 7.32.) He exerts a force of $5 0 0 ~ \mathsf { N }$ on the crate parallel to the ramp and moves at a constant speed. Be certain to include the work he does on the crate andon his body to get up the ramp.

6. How much work is done by the boy pulling his sister $3 0 . 0 \mathrm { m }$ in a wagon as shown in Figure 7.33? Assume no friction acts on the wagon.

7. A shopper pushes a grocery cart $2 0 . 0 \mathrm { m }$ at constant speed on level ground, against a $3 5 . 0 \mathsf { N }$ frictional force. He pushes in a direction $2 5 . 0 ^ { \circ }$ below the horizontal. (a) What is the work done on the cart by friction? (b) What is the work done on the cart by the gravitational force? (c) What is the work done on the cart by the shopper? (d) Find the force the shopper exerts, using energy considerations. (e) What is the total work done on the cart?

8. Suppose the ski patrol lowers a rescue sled and victim, having a total mass of $9 0 . 0 \mathsf { k g } .$ , down a $6 0 . 0 ^ { \circ }$ slope at constant speed, as shown in Figure 7.34. The coefficient of friction between the sled and the snow is 0.100. (a) How much work is done by friction as the sled moves $3 0 . 0 \mathrm { m }$ along the hill? (b) How much work is done by the rope on the sled in this distance? (c) What is the work done by the gravitational force on the sled? (d) What is the total work done?

# 7.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem

9. Compare the kinetic energy of a $2 0 , 0 0 0 { \cdot } \mathsf { k g }$ truck moving at $1 1 0 ~ \mathsf { k m / h }$ with that of an $8 0 . 0 \mathrm { - } \mathsf { k g }$ astronaut in orbit moving at $2 7 , 5 0 0 \mathrm { k m / h }$ .   
10. (a) How fast must a 3000-kg elephant move to have the same kinetic energy as a $6 5 . 0 \substack { - \mathrm { k g } }$ sprinter running at $1 0 . 0 \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s } ?$ (b) Discuss how the larger energies needed for the movement of larger animals would relate to metabolic rates.   
11. Confirm the value given for the kinetic energy of an aircraft carrier in Table 7.1. You will need to look up the definition of a nautical mile ( $\scriptstyle 1 \ k \ n \circ \ t = 1$ nautical mile/h).   
12. (a) Calculate the force needed to bring a $9 5 0 { \cdot } \mathsf { k g }$ car to rest from a speed of $9 0 . 0 \mathrm { k m / h }$ in a distance of ${ \boldsymbol { \mathsf { 1 2 0 } } } { \boldsymbol { \mathsf { m } } }$ (a fairly typical distance for a non-panic stop). (b) Suppose instead the car hits a concrete abutment at full speed and is brought to a stop in $2 . 0 0 \mathsf { m }$ . Calculate the force exerted on the car and compare it with the force found in part (a).

13. A car’s bumper is designed to withstand a $4 . 0 \mathrm { - k m / h }$ $( 1 . 1 2 - m / s )$ collision with an immovable object without damage to the body of the car. The bumper cushions the shock by absorbing the force over a distance. Calculate the magnitude of the average force on a bumper that collapses $0 . 2 0 0 \mathrm { m }$ while bringing a $9 0 0 - 1 \leq 9$ car to rest from an initial speed of $1 . 1 2 \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ .

14. Boxing gloves are padded to lessen the force of a blow. (a) Calculate the force exerted by a boxing glove on an opponent’s face, if the glove and face compress $7 . 5 0 \mathsf { c m }$ during a blow in which the $7 . 0 0 \mathrm { - } \mathsf { k g }$ arm and glove are brought to rest from an initial speed of $\mathsf { 1 0 . 0 ~ m / s }$ . (b) Calculate the force exerted by an identical blow in the days when no gloves were used and the knuckles and face would compress only $2 . 0 0 \mathsf { c m }$ . (c) Discuss the magnitude of the force with glove on. Does it seem high enough to cause damage even though it is lower than the force with no glove?

15. Using energy considerations, calculate the average force a $6 0 . 0 \substack { - \mathrm { k g } }$ sprinter exerts backward on the track to accelerate from 2.00 to $8 . 0 0 ~ \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s }$ in a distance of $2 5 . 0 \mathsf { m }$ , if he encounters a headwind that exerts an average force of $3 0 . 0 ~ \mathsf { N }$ against him.

# 7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy

16. A hydroelectric power facility (see Figure 7.35) converts the gravitational potential energy of water behind a dam to electric energy. (a) What is the gravitational potential energy relative to the generators of a lake of volume $5 0 . 0 \mathrm { k m } ^ { 3 }$ $\mathrm { ( m a s s = 5 . 0 0 \times 1 0 ^ { 1 3 } \ k g ) }$ , given that the lake has an average height of $4 0 . 0 \mathrm { m }$ above the generators? (b) Compare this with the energy stored in a 9-megaton fusion bomb.

17. (a) How much gravitational potential energy (relative to the ground on which it is built) is stored in the Great Pyramid of Cheops, given that its mass is about $7 \times 1 0 ^ { 9 } ~ \mathrm { k g }$ and its center of mass is $3 6 . 5 ~ \mathsf { m }$ above the surrounding ground? (b) How does this energy compare with the daily food intake of a person?

18. Suppose a 350-g kookaburra (a large kingfisher bird) picks up a 75-g snake and raises it $2 . 5 ~ \mathsf { m }$ from the ground to a branch. (a) How much work did the bird do on the snake? (b) How much work did it do to raise its own center of mass to the branch?

19. In Example 7.7, we found that the speed of a roller coaster that had descended $2 0 . 0 \mathsf { m }$ was only slightly greater when it had an initial speed of 5.00 $\mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ than when it started from rest. This implies that $\Delta \mathrm { P E } > > \mathrm { K E } _ { \mathrm { i } }$ . Confirm this statement by taking the ratio of to $\mathrm { K E _ { i } }$ . (Note that mass cancels.)

20. A $_ { 1 0 0 - \tt g }$ toy car is propelled by a compressed spring that starts it moving. The car follows the curved track in Figure 7.36. Show that the final speed of the toy car is $0 . 6 8 7 \mathrm { m } / \mathrm { s }$ if its initial speed is $2 . 0 0 ~ \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s }$ and it coasts up the frictionless slope, gaining $0 . 1 8 0 \mathrm { m }$ in altitude.

21. In a downhill ski race, surprisingly, little advantage is gained by getting a running start. (This is because the initial kinetic energy is small compared with the gain in gravitational potential energy on even small hills.) To demonstrate this, find the final speed and the time taken for a skier who skies $7 0 . 0 \mathrm { m }$ along a $3 0 ^ { \circ }$ slope neglecting friction: (a) Starting from rest. (b) Starting with an initial speed of $2 . 5 0 ~ \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s }$ . (c) Does the answer surprise you? Discuss why it is still advantageous to get a running start in very competitive events.

# 7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential Energy

22. A $5 . 0 0 \times 1 0 ^ { 5 }$ subway train is brought to a stop from a speed of $0 . 5 0 0 \mathrm { m } / \mathrm { s }$ in $0 . 4 0 0 \mathrm { m }$ by a large spring bumper at the end of its track. What is the force constant $k$ of the spring?

23. A pogo stick has a spring with a force constant of $2 . 5 0 x 1 0 ^ { 4 } \mathrm { N / m }$ , which can be compressed 12.0 cm. To what maximum height can a child jump on the stick using only the energy in the spring, if the child and stick have a total mass of $4 0 . 0 \mathsf { k g } \colon$ Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategies for Energy.

# 7.5 Nonconservative Forces

24. A $6 0 . 0 \substack { - \ k \ g }$ skier with an initial speed of $1 2 . 0 ~ \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ coasts up a $2 . 5 0 – \mathsf { m }$ -high rise as shown in Figure 7.37. Find her final speed at the top, given that the coefficient of friction between her skis and the snow is 0.0800. (Hint: Find the distance traveled up the incline assuming a straight-line path as shown in the figure.)

25. (a) How high a hill can a car coast up (engine disengaged) if work done by friction is negligible and its initial speed is $\mathtt { 1 1 0 k m / h ? }$ (b) If, in actuality, a $7 5 0 - 1 \tt k g$ car with an initial speed of 110 km/h is observed to coast up a hill to a height 22.0 m above its starting point, how much thermal energy was generated by friction? (c) What is the average force of friction if the hill has a slope $2 . 5 ^ { \circ }$ above the horizontal?

# 7.6 Conservation of Energy

26. Using values from Table 7.1, how many DNA molecules could be broken by the energy carried by a single electron in the beam of an oldfashioned TV tube? (These electrons were not dangerous in themselves, but they did create dangerous x rays. Later model tube TVs had shielding that absorbed x rays before they escaped and exposed viewers.)

27. Using energy considerations and assuming negligible air resistance, show that a rock thrown from a bridge $2 0 . 0 \mathrm { m }$ above water with an initial speed of $1 5 . 0 ~ \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ strikes the water with a speed of $2 4 . 8 ~ \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ independent of the direction thrown.

28. If the energy in fusion bombs were used to supply the energy needs of the world, how many of the $9$ -megaton variety would be needed for a year’s supply of energy (using data from Table 7.1)? This is not as far-fetched as it may sound—there are thousands of nuclear bombs, and their energy can be trapped in underground explosions and converted to electricity, as natural geothermal energy is.

29. (a) Use of hydrogen fusion to supply energy is a dream that may be realized in the next century. Fusion would be a relatively clean and almost limitless supply of energy, as can be seen from Table 7.1. To illustrate this, calculate how many years the present energy needs of the world could be supplied by one millionth of the oceans’ hydrogen fusion energy. (b) How does this time compare with historically significant events, such as the duration of stable economic systems?

# 7.7 Power

30. The Crab Nebula (see Figure 7.38) pulsar is the remnant of a supernova that occurred in A.D. 1054. Using data from Table 7.3, calculate the approximate factor by which the power output of this astronomical object has declined since its explosion.

31. Suppose a star 1000 times brighter than our Sun (that is, emitting 1000 times the power) suddenly goes supernova. Using data from Table 7.3: (a) By what factor does its power output increase? (b) How many times brighter than our entire Milky Way galaxy is the supernova? (c) Based on your answers, discuss whether it should be possible to observe supernovas in distant galaxies. Note that there are on the order of $1 0 ^ { 1 1 }$ observable galaxies, the average brightness of which is somewhat less than our own galaxy.

32. A person in good physical condition can put out 100 W of useful power for several hours at a stretch, perhaps by pedaling a mechanism that drives an electric generator. Neglecting any problems of generator efficiency and practical considerations such as resting time: (a) How many people would it take to run a 4.00-kW electric clothes dryer? (b) How many people would it take to replace a large electric power plant that generates 800 MW?

33. What is the cost of operating a 3.00-W electric clock for a year if the cost of electricity is $\$ 0.0900$ per ?

34. A large household air conditioner may consume $\mathsf { 1 5 . 0 k W }$ of power. What is the cost of operating this air conditioner $3 . 0 0 \mathrm { { h } }$ per day for 30.0 d if the cost of electricity is $\$ 0.110$ per $\cdot$ ?

35. (a) What is the average power consumption in watts of an appliance that uses $5 . 0 0 \mathrm { k W \cdot h }$ of energy per day? (b) How many joules of energy does this appliance consume in a year?

36. (a) What is the average useful power output of a person who does $6 . 0 0 \times 1 0 ^ { 6 }$ of useful work in $8 . 0 0 \mathsf { h ? }$ (b) Working at this rate, how long will it take this person to lift $2 0 0 0 \mathsf { k g }$ of bricks $1 . 5 0 \mathrm { m }$ to a platform? (Work done to lift his body can be omitted because it is not considered useful output here.)

37. A $5 0 0 - \mathsf { k g }$ dragster accelerates from rest to a final speed of $\mathsf { 1 1 0 m / s }$ in $4 0 0 \mathrm { m }$ (about a quarter of a mile) and encounters an average frictional force of 1200 N. What is its average power output in watts and horsepower if this takes 7.30 s?

38. (a) How long will it take an $8 5 0 \mathrm { - } \mathsf { k g }$ car with a useful power output of 40.0 hp $( 1 \mathsf { h p } = 7 4 6 \mathsf { W } )$ to reach a speed of $1 5 . 0 ~ \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ , neglecting friction? (b) How long will this acceleration take if the car also climbs a $3 . 0 0 \cdot \mathsf { m }$ -high hill in the process?

39. (a) Find the useful power output of an elevator motor that lifts a 2500-kg load a height of $3 5 . 0 \mathrm { m }$ in $\mathtt { 1 2 . 0 s }$ , if it also increases the speed from rest to $4 . 0 0 \ : \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s }$ . Note that the total mass of the counterbalanced system is $1 0 , 0 0 0 \mathrm { k g } { - 5 0 }$ that only $2 5 0 0 \mathsf { k g }$ is raised in height, but the full ${ 1 0 , 0 0 0 \mathsf { k g } }$ is accelerated. (b) What does it cost, if electricity is $\$ 023000$ per ?

40. (a) What is the available energy content, in joules, of a battery that operates a 2.00-W electric clock for 18 months? (b) How long can a battery that can supply $8 . 0 0 \times 1 0 ^ { 4 }$ run a pocket calculator that consumes energy at the rate of $1 . 0 0 \times 1 0 ^ { - 3 }$ ?

41. (a) How long would it take a $1 . 5 0 \times 1 0 ^ { 5 }$ -kg airplane with engines that produce 100 MW of power to reach a speed of $2 5 0 ~ \mathrm { m / s }$ and an altitude of 12.0 km if air resistance were negligible? (b) If it actually takes 900 s, what is the power? (c) Given this power, what is the average force of air resistance if the airplane takes 1200 s? (Hint: You must find the distance the plane travels in 1200 s assuming constant acceleration.)

42. Calculate the power output needed for a $9 5 0 { \mathrm { - } } \mathsf { k g }$ car to climb a $2 . 0 0 ^ { \circ }$ slope at a constant $3 0 . 0 ~ \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ while encountering wind resistance and friction totaling 600 N. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategies for Energy.

43. (a) Calculate the power per square meter reaching Earth’s upper atmosphere from the Sun. (Take the power output of the Sun to be $4 . 0 0 \times 1 0 ^ { 2 6 }$ (b) Part of this is absorbed and reflected by the atmosphere, so that a maximum of $1 . 3 0 \mathrm { k W } / \mathrm { m } ^ { 2 }$ reaches Earth’s surface. Calculate the area in $\mathrm { k m } ^ { 2 }$ of solar energy collectors needed to replace an electric power plant that generates 750 MW if the collectors convert an average of $2 . 0 0 \%$ of the maximum power into electricity. (This small conversion efficiency is due to the devices themselves, and the fact that the sun is directly overhead only briefly.) With the same assumptions, what area would be needed to meet the United States’ energy needs $( 1 . 0 5 \times 1 0 ^ { 2 0 } \mathrm { J } )$ ？ Australia’s energy needs $( 5 . 4 \times 1 0 ^ { 1 8 } \mathrm { ~ J } ) ^ { . }$ China’s energy needs $( 6 . 3 \times 1 0 ^ { 1 9 }$ (These energy consumption values are from 2006.)

# 7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans

44. (a) How long can you rapidly climb stairs (116/ min) on the $9 3 . 0 \ \mathsf { k c a l }$ of energy in a $\mathsf { 1 0 . 0 – g }$ pat of butter? (b) How many flights is this if each flight has 16 stairs?

45. (a) What is the power output in watts and horsepower of a $7 0 . 0 \mathrm { - } \mathsf { k g }$ sprinter who accelerates from rest to $1 0 . 0 ~ \mathrm { m / s }$ in 3.00 s? (b) Considering the amount of power generated, do you think a well-trained athlete could do this repetitively for long periods of time?

46. Calculate the power output in watts and horsepower of a shot-putter who takes 1.20 s to accelerate the $7 . 2 7 \cdot 1 \tt { k g }$ shot from rest to $\mathsf { 1 4 . 0 ~ m / s }$ , while raising it $0 . 8 0 0 \mathrm { { m } }$ . (Do not include the power produced to accelerate his body.)

47. (a) What is the efficiency of an out-of-condition person who does $2 . 1 0 \times 1 0 ^ { 5 }$ of useful work while metabolizing 500 kcal of food energy? (b) How many food calories would a well-conditioned athlete metabolize in doing the same work with an efficiency of $2 0 \% ?$

48. Energy that is not utilized for work or heat transfer is converted to the chemical energy of body fat containing about $3 9 \ k \mathrm { ] } / \underline { { \alpha } }$ . How many grams of fat will you gain if you eat $1 0 , 0 0 0 \mathsf { k } \mathsf { J }$ (about 2500 kcal) one day and do nothing but sit relaxed for $1 6 . 0 \mathsf { h }$ and sleep for the other $8 . 0 0 \mathsf { h ? }$ Use data from Table 7.5 for the energy consumption rates of these activities.

49. Using data from Table 7.5, calculate the daily energy needs of a person who sleeps for $7 . 0 0 \ : \mathrm { h }$ , walks for $2 . 0 0 \mathrm { { h } }$ , attends classes for $4 . 0 0 \ : \mathsf { h }$ , cycles for $2 . 0 0 \mathfrak { h }$ , sits relaxed for $3 . 0 0 \mathrm { { h } }$ , and studies for $6 . 0 0 \mathrm { { h } }$ . (Studying consumes energy at the same rate as sitting in class.)

50. What is the efficiency of a subject on a treadmill who puts out work at the rate of 100 W while consuming oxygen at the rate of 2.00 L/min? (Hint: See Table 7.5.)

51. Shoveling snow can be extremely taxing because the arms have such a low efficiency in this activity. Suppose a person shoveling a footpath metabolizes food at the rate of 800 W. (a) What is her useful power output? (b) How long will it take her to lift $3 0 0 0 ~ \mathsf { k g }$ of snow $\mathsf { 1 . 2 0 m ? }$ (This could be the amount of heavy snow on $2 0 ~ \mathsf { m }$ of footpath.) (c) How much waste heat transfer in kilojoules will she generate in the process?

52. Very large forces are produced in joints when a person jumps from some height to the ground. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the force produced if an $8 0 . 0 \mathrm { - } \mathsf { k g }$ person jumps from a $0 . 6 0 0 - \mathsf { m }$ -high ledge and lands stiffly, compressing joint material $\mathtt { 1 . 5 0 \mathtt { c m } }$ as a result. (Be certain to include the weight of the person.) (b) In practice the knees bend almost involuntarily to help extend the distance over which you stop. Calculate the magnitude of the force produced if the stopping distance is $0 . 3 0 0 \mathrm { ~ m ~ }$ . (c) Compare both forces with the weight of the person.

53. Jogging on hard surfaces with insufficiently padded shoes produces large forces in the feet and legs. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the force needed to stop the downward motion of a jogger’s leg, if his leg has a mass of $1 3 . 0 \mathsf { k g }$ , a speed of $6 . 0 0 \ : \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s }$ , and stops in a distance of 1.50 cm. (Be certain to include the weight of the $7 5 . 0 \ – \mathsf { k g }$ jogger’s body.) (b) Compare this force with the weight of the jogger.

54. (a) Calculate the energy in kJ used by a $5 5 . 0 \mathrm { - } \mathsf { k g }$ person who does 50 deep knee bends in which their center of mass is lowered and raised 0.400 m. (They do work in both directions.) You may assume their efficiency is $20 \%$ . (b) What is the average power consumption rate in watts if they do this in 3.00 min?

55. Kanellos Kanellopoulos flew 119 km from Crete to Santorini, Greece, on April 23, 1988, in the Daedalus8 , an aircraft powered by a bicycletype drive mechanism (see Figure 7.40). His useful power output for the 234-min trip was about 350 W. Using the efficiency for cycling from Table 7.2, calculate the food energy in kilojoules he metabolized during the flight.

56. The swimmer shown in Figure 7.41 exerts an average horizontal backward force of $8 0 . 0 ~ \mathsf { N }$ with his arm during each $1 . 8 0 \mathrm { m }$ long stroke. (a) What is his work output in each stroke? (b) Calculate the power output of his arms if he does 120 strokes per minute.

57. Mountain climbers carry bottled oxygen when at very high altitudes. (a) Assuming that a mountain climber uses oxygen at twice the rate for climbing 116 stairs per minute (because of low air temperature and winds), calculate how many liters of oxygen a climber would need for $1 0 . 0 \mathsf { h }$ of climbing. (These are liters at sea level.) Note that only $40 \%$ of the inhaled oxygen is utilized; the rest is exhaled. (b) How much useful work does the climber do if he and his equipment have a mass of $9 0 . 0 \mathsf { k g }$ and he gains $1 0 0 0 \mathrm { m }$ of altitude? (c) What is his efficiency for the $1 0 . 0 \cdot h$ climb?

The awe-inspiring Great Pyramid of Cheops was built more than 4500 years ago. Its square base, originally $2 3 0 \mathrm { m }$ on a side, covered 13.1 acres, and it was $1 4 6 ~ \mathsf { m }$ high, with a mass of about $7 \times 1 0 ^ { 9 }$ . (The pyramid’s dimensions are slightly different today due to quarrying and some sagging.) Historians estimate that 20,000 workers spent 20 years to construct it, working 12-hour days, 330 days per year. (a) Calculate the gravitational potential energy stored in the pyramid, given its center of mass is at one-fourth its height. (b) Only a fraction of the workers lifted blocks; most were involved in support services such as building ramps (see Figure 7.42), bringing food and water, and hauling blocks to the site. Calculate the efficiency of the workers who did the lifting, assuming there were 1000 of them and they consumed food energy at the rate of 300 kcal/h. What does your answer imply about how much of their work went into block-lifting, versus how much work went into friction and lifting and lowering their own bodies? (c) Calculate the mass of food that had to be supplied each day, assuming that the average worker required 3600 kcal per day and that their diet was $5 \%$ protein, $60 \%$ carbohydrate, and $3 5 \%$ fat. (These proportions neglect the mass of bulk and nondigestible materials consumed.)

59. (a) How long can you play tennis on the $8 0 0 \kappa \mathrm { ] }$ (about $2 0 0 \ k \mathtt { c a l } )$ of energy in a candy bar? (b) Does this seem like a long time? Discuss why exercise is necessary but may not be sufficient to cause a person to lose weight.

# 7.9 World Energy Use

60. Integrated Concepts

(a) Calculate the force the woman in Figure 7.43 exerts to do a push-up at constant speed, taking all data to be known to three digits. (b) How much work does she do if her center of mass rises 0.240 m? (c) What is her useful power output if she does 25 push-ups in 1 min? (Should work done lowering her body be included? See the discussion of useful work in Work, Energy, and Power in Humans.

61. Integrated Concepts

A $7 5 . 0 \ – \mathsf { k g }$ cross-country skier is climbing a $3 . 0 ^ { \circ }$ slope at a constant speed of $2 . 0 0 ~ \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s }$ and encounters air resistance of 25.0 N. Find his power output for work done against the gravitational force and air resistance. (b) What average force does he exert backward on the snow to accomplish this? (c) If he continues to exert this force and to experience the same air resistance when he reaches a level area, how long will it take him to reach a velocity of $1 0 . 0 ~ \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s } ?$

62. Integrated Concepts The $7 0 . 0 \substack { - \mathrm { k g } }$ swimmer in Figure 7.41 starts a race with an initial velocity of $1 . 2 5 \ : \mathsf { m } / \mathsf { s }$ and exerts an average force of $8 0 . 0 ~ \mathsf { N }$ backward with his arms during each $1 . 8 0 \mathrm { m }$ long stroke. (a) What is his initial acceleration if water resistance is 45.0 N? (b) What is the subsequent average resistance force from the water during the 5.00 s it takes him to reach his top velocity of $2 . 5 0 \ : \mathrm { m } / \mathsf { s } ?$ (c) Discuss whether water resistance seems to increase linearly with velocity.

63. Integrated Concepts

A toy gun uses a spring with a force constant of ${ 3 0 0 } \mathsf { N / m }$ to propel a $\mathsf { 1 0 . 0 – g }$ steel ball. If the spring is compressed $7 . 0 0 \mathsf { c m }$ and friction is negligible: (a) How much force is needed to compress the spring? (b) To what maximum height can the ball be shot? (c) At what angles above the horizontal may a child aim to hit a target $3 . 0 0 \mathrm { ~ m ~ }$ away at the same height as the gun? (d) What is the gun’s maximum range on level ground?

64. Integrated Concepts (a) What force must be supplied by an elevator cable to produce an acceleration of $0 . 8 0 0 \mathrm { m } / \mathrm { s } ^ { 2 }$ against a 200-N frictional force, if the mass of the loaded elevator is $\displaystyle 1 5 0 0 \mathsf { k g ? }$ (b) How much work is done by the cable in lifting the elevator $2 0 . 0 \mathsf { m ? }$ (c) What is the final speed of the elevator if it starts from rest? (d) How much work went into thermal energy?

65. Unreasonable Results A car advertisement claims that its $9 0 0 - \mathsf { k g }$ car accelerated from rest to $3 0 . 0 \ : \mathrm { m / s }$ and drove 100 km, gaining $3 . 0 0 \mathrm { k m }$ in altitude, on 1.0 gal of gasoline. The average force of friction including air resistance was $7 0 0 ~ \mathsf { N }$ . Assume all values are known to three significant figures. (a) Calculate the car’s efficiency. (b) What is unreasonable about the result? (c) Which premise is unreasonable, or which premises are inconsistent?

66. Unreasonable Results Body fat is metabolized, supplying $9 . 3 0 \mathrm { \ k c a l / g } ,$ when dietary intake is less than needed to fuel metabolism. The manufacturers of an exercise bicycle claim that you can metabolize $0 . 5 0 0 \mathsf { k g }$ of fat per day by vigorously exercising for $2 . 0 0 \mathfrak { h }$ per day on their machine. (a) How many kcal are supplied by the metabolization of $0 . 5 0 0 \mathsf { k g }$ of fat? (b) Calculate the kcal/min that you would have to utilize to metabolize fat at the rate of $0 . 5 0 0 \mathsf { k g }$ in $2 . 0 0 \mathfrak { h }$ . (c) What is unreasonable about the results? (d) Which premise is unreasonable, or which premises are inconsistent?

67. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a person climbing and descending stairs. Construct a problem in which you calculate the long-term rate at which stairs can be climbed considering the mass of the person, his ability to generate power with his legs, and the height of a single stair step. Also consider why the same person can descend stairs at a faster rate for a nearly unlimited time in spite of the fact that very similar forces are exerted going down as going up. (This points to a fundamentally different process for descending versus climbing stairs.)

68. Construct Your Own Problem Consider humans generating electricity by pedaling a device similar to a stationary bicycle. Construct a problem in which you determine the number of people it would take to replace a large electrical generation facility. Among the things to consider are the power output that is reasonable using the legs, rest time, and the need for electricity 24 hours per day. Discuss the practical implications of your results.

69. Integrated Concepts

A 105-kg basketball player crouches down 0.400 m while waiting to jump. After exerting a force on the floor through this $0 . 4 0 0 \mathsf { m }$ , their feet leave the floor and their center of gravity rises $0 . 9 5 0 \mathrm { m }$ above its normal standing erect position. (a) Using energy considerations, calculate the player's velocity when they leave the floor. (b) What average force did the player exert on the floor? (Do not neglect the force to support their weight as well as that to accelerate them.) (c) What was the player's power output during the acceleration phase?

70. Critical Thinking Two boxes of the same mass are pressed against pistons that compress and release the boxes on frictionless surfaces. Box A’s piston has a constant force F over a distance $x$ before the box is released while box B starts at zero force and increases linearly to a force of $2 F$ before releasing the box at a distance of ${ \bf 1 } / { \bf 2 } d .$ (a) Which of these boxes has the greatest speed after releasing from the piston? (b) Based on experimental data for trials similar to box A, an equation that fits the data is suggested for the change in kinetic energy, $\varDelta K E$ , which may not be correct: $\varDelta K E = K F ^ { 1 / 2 } x ^ { 1 / 2 }$ , where $\boldsymbol { K }$ is a constant with appropriate units, $F$ is the applied force, and $x$ is the distance the piston moves in contact with the box. Is this equation consistent with your answer from part a? Explain why or why not. Does this equation make sense? Explain why or why not. (c) If the applied force of the piston is proportional to the distance in contact with the box, graph the work done on the box vs. the distance in contact with the piston and box.