# 55.5 Mandatory And Discretionary Access Control  

Who gets to decide what the access control on a computer resource should be? For most people, the answer seems obvious: whoever owns the resource. In the case of a user’s file, the user should determine access control settings. In the case of a system resource, the system administrator, or perhaps the owner of the computer, should determine them. However, for some systems and some security policies, that’s not the right answer. In particular, the parties who care most about information security sometimes want tighter controls than that.  

The military is the most obvious example. We’ve all heard of Top Secret information, and probably all understand that even if you are allowed to see Top Secret information, you’re not supposed to let other people see it, too. And that’s true even if the information in question is in a file that you created yourself, such as a report that contains statistics or quotations from some other Top Secret document. In these cases, the simple answer of the creator controlling access permissions isn’t right. Whoever is in overall charge of information security in the organization needs to make those decisions, which implies that principal has the power to set the access controls for information created by and belonging to other users, and that those users can’t override his decisions. The more common case is called discretionary access control. Whether almost anyone or almost no one is given access to a resource is at the discretion of the owning user. The more restrictive case is called mandatory access control. At least some elements of the access control decisions in such systems are mandated by an authority, who can override the desires of the owner of the information. The choice of discretionary or mandatory access control is orthogonal to whether you use ACLs or capabilities, and is often independent of other aspects of the access control mechanism, such as how access information is stored and handled. A mandatory access control system can also include discretionary elements, which allow further restriction (but not loosening) of mandatory controls.  

Many people will never work with a system running mandatory access controls, so we won’t go further into how they work, beyond observing that clearly the operating system is going to be involved in enforcing them. Should you ever need to work in an environment where mandatory access control is important, you can be sure you will hear about it. You should learn more about it at that point, since when someone cares enough to use mandatory access control mechanisms, they also care enough to punish users who don’t follow the rules. Loscocco [L01] describes a special version of Linux that incorporates mandatory access control. This is a good paper to start with if you want to learn more about the characteristics of such systems.  

